Add Judges Blog (#368)
mlflow/mlflow-website: website/blog/2025-09-15-make-judge/index.mdx

---
title: "Beyond Generic Metrics: Build Domain-Specific LLM Judges with MLflow"
description: How to create custom evaluators that actually understand your quality requirements
slug: custom-llm-judges-make-judge
authors: [mlflow-maintainers]
tags: [genai, evaluation, judges, llm]
thumbnail: /img/blog/make-judge-thumbnail.png
image: /img/blog/make-judge-thumbnail.png
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

In this post, we'll show how MLflow Scorers—the framework's core abstraction for automated evaluation—make it simple to build judges that actually understand your domain-specific quality requirements.

[MLflow Scorers](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/genai/eval-monitor/) are evaluation functions that can assess any aspect of your GenAI application. The `make_judge` API lets you create these scorers using natural language instructions, and here's the key insight: whether you're using MLflow's built-in scorers or creating custom ones, they all share the same powerful capabilities.

> If you've tried evaluating GenAI applications, you know generic metrics miss what matters. Your customer support bot needs to be evaluated on empathy and problem resolution. Your code generator needs to be checked for security vulnerabilities. Your medical advisor needs domain-specific accuracy checks. MLflow Scorers let you define these requirements in plain English.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've tried evaluating GenAI applications, you know generic LLM judges are not enough. Your customer support bot needs to be evaluated on empathy and problem resolution. Your code generator needs to be checked for security vulnerabilities. Your medical advisor needs domain-specific accuracy checks. At the same time, translating these requirements into custom LLM judges is non-trivial: the judge has to focus on the right parts of the evaluated GenAI trace, and its prompt needs to be tuned to capture the nuances and preferences of human experts. This requires significant effort and often results in suboptimal judges, which eventually detracts from the main goal of building an effective GenAI application. 
```

Not married to this wording, but I believe it's important to emphasize that the status-quo requires a lot of work by the developer which in the end takes away from the main goal of building the GenAI app.

This post demonstrates the power of MLflow Scorers by showing how to:

> - Create custom scorers with `make_judge` using natural language instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create custom scorers with `make_judge` using simple declarative instructions
```
I think the declarative part is important compared to the "natural language" part, because we already had a way to use natural language to build judges.

> - Build scorers that can act agentically, analyzing entire execution traces

Reviewer: We should clarify this. Existing scorers still have the ability to view the whole trace. IMO the "agentic" part is that the judge now has its own tools for trace introspection, which allows it to complete complex evaluation tasks without requiring a complicated prompt (this goes back to the "simple declarative" messaging in the previous comment).

> - Align scorers with human feedback to improve their accuracy over time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatically align scorers with subject-matter expert preferences to improve scorer accuracy over time
```

> - Share and version scorers across your team

Reviewer: This is already the case, right? This is not part of this release.

> We'll build a customer support quality scorer, show how it can evaluate complex agent behaviors, and demonstrate how human feedback makes it smarter. The built-in scorers MLflow provides? They're just pre-defined versions using these same capabilities. Once you understand this, you'll see how flexible and powerful MLflow's evaluation framework really is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate the power of the new API, we will build a customer support quality scorer, show how it can evaluate complex agent behaviors, and demonstrate how human feedback makes it more effective. The built-in scorers MLflow provides? They're just pre-defined versions using these same capabilities. Once you understand this, you'll see how flexible and powerful MLflow's evaluation framework really is.
```

## Creating Your First Scorer: A Customer Support Evaluator

Let's start with a practical example. Say you're building a customer support chatbot. You need a scorer that evaluates whether responses are actually helpful—not just grammatically correct.

First, install MLflow:

```shell
pip install mlflow
```

Now let's create a scorer that understands what makes a good support response:

```python
from mlflow.genai.judges import make_judge

# Create a scorer for customer support quality
support_scorer = make_judge(
    name="support_quality",
    instructions=(
        "Evaluate if the response in {{ outputs }} properly addresses "
        "the customer issue in {{ inputs }}.\n\n"

>         "Consider: tone, helpfulness, clarity, and completeness.\n"

Reviewer: IMO this example goes against best practices that we would recommend to users (and also what we 've heard from customers). It's easier to focus a scorer on a single criterion (e.g., tone) instead of combining several criteria together.

>         "Rate as: 'excellent', 'good', 'fair', or 'poor'"

Reviewer: Depending on the example criterion that we pick, let's decide what is an appropriate rubric and simplify if possible (e.g., why is it necessary to distinguish between "excellent" and "good"?)

    ),
    model="anthropic:/claude-3-opus-20240229"
)
```

> The key here is that we're defining a scorer using plain English. No complex scoring functions, no regex patterns—just describe what you're looking for. This scorer is now a reusable evaluation component that works anywhere in MLflow's ecosystem.

Reviewer: Note to reframe this in terms of declarative simple language that does not describe the "how" but the "what".

Let's see how our scorer handles a terrible support response:

```python
# Test the scorer on a support interaction
result = support_scorer(
    inputs={"issue": "Can't reset my password"},
    outputs={"response": "Have you tried turning it off and on again?"}
)

print(f"Rating: {result.value}")
print(f"Reasoning: {result.rationale}")
```

Output:

```
Rating: poor
Reasoning: The response does not address the password reset issue at all.
It provides a generic IT troubleshooting suggestion that is irrelevant to
the customer's specific problem...
```

> ### Scaling Up: Evaluating Entire Datasets

Reviewer: This describes existing functionality. I would suggest just adding the code snippet in the previous section, with a note that `make_judge()` returns a Scorer than can be plugged in to `mlflow.genai.evaluate()` in order to scale up evaluations to entire datasets or in monitoring APIs to apply the scorers on production traffic.

Testing individual responses is useful, but the real value comes when you use your scorer to evaluate entire conversation datasets. Here's how scorers integrate seamlessly with MLflow's evaluation framework:

```python
import mlflow
import pandas as pd

# Your support conversations dataset
test_data = pd.DataFrame([
    {
        "inputs": {"issue": "Billing error - charged twice"},
        "outputs": {"response": "I'll immediately refund the duplicate charge."}
    },
    {
        "inputs": {"issue": "Feature request for dark mode"},
        "outputs": {"response": "Great suggestion! I've forwarded this to our product team."}
    }
])

# Run evaluation with your custom scorer
results = mlflow.genai.evaluate(
    data=test_data,
    scorers=[support_scorer]
)

# View results
print(results.tables["eval_results_table"])
```

## Scorers as Agents: Trace-Based Evaluation

> 

Reviewer 2: Agreed - we need a more complex trace

So far our scorer has evaluated simple question-answer pairs. But MLflow Scorers can act agentically—they can analyze complex AI agents that make multiple LLM calls, use tools, and follow reasoning chains.

With trace-based evaluation, your scorer evaluates not just the final output, but the entire execution path:

```python
# Create a scorer that analyzes agent behavior
agent_scorer = make_judge(
    name="agent_efficiency",
    instructions=(
        "Analyze the {{ trace }} for efficiency and correctness.\n\n"
        "Check for: unnecessary tool calls, circular reasoning, "
        "proper error handling, and optimal execution paths.\n"
        "Rate as: 'optimal', 'acceptable', or 'inefficient'"
    ),

>     model="anthropic:/claude-3-opus-20240229"

Reviewer 2: Let's recommend gpt-4o. claude 3 is dated at this point

)

# Evaluate a traced agent execution
with mlflow.start_span("agent_task") as span:
    # Your agent logic here
    result = my_agent.execute(task)
    trace_id = span.trace_id

trace = mlflow.get_trace(trace_id)
evaluation = agent_scorer(trace=trace)
```

## The Game Changer: Human Feedback Alignment

Here's where things get interesting. What happens when your scorer disagrees with your human experts? Instead of rewriting prompts endlessly, MLflow Scorers can learn from human corrections.

The process works like this:

```python
from mlflow.entities import AssessmentSource, AssessmentSourceType

# Step 1: Run scorer on production data

> for trace_id in production_traces:

Reviewer: It might not be clear how to populate `production_traces`. Let's make it the results of a `search_traces` call:
```
production_traces = search_traces(...) # Gather traces from production or development environments
```
I also don't think that we need to compute the `scorer_result`. What purpose does this serve?

    trace = mlflow.get_trace(trace_id)
    scorer_result = support_scorer(trace=trace)

# Step 2: Collect human feedback on scorer decisions

> mlflow.log_feedback(

Reviewer: We should illustrate here how to provide feedback in the trace UI. In general, let's break the section down to two parts -- first providing feedback on the traces (either through the trace UI or programmatically), and then the alignment part.

In the MLflow 3.4 release, we introduce the `make_judge` method as a powerful new API to create [MLflow Scorers](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/genai/eval-monitor/), which are the framework's core abstraction for automated evaluation. The API enables you to create scorers in a declarative manner using simple instructions. With `make_judge`, you can easily build judges that understand your domain-specific quality requirements and automatically align with feedback from human experts.

This post demonstrates the power of MLflow Scorers by showing how to:

- Create custom scorers with `make_judge` using simple declarative instructions
- Build scorers that act as agents with built-in tools for trace introspection, enabling complex evaluation tasks without complicated prompts or complex span parsing logic

> - Automatically align scorers with subject-matter expert preferences to improve scorer accuracy over time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  Automatically align scorers with subject-matter expert preferences to improve scorer accuracy over time
- In addition to the built-in judge-alignment methods, plug custom methods into mlflow's ecosystem in order to provide domain-specific alignment for your judges.
```

            subject="Refund Processed",
            body="Your refund of $99.99 has been processed..."
        )
        mlflow.log_output({"notification_sent": True})

    trace_id = main_span.trace_id

# The scorer analyzes the entire trace
trace = mlflow.get_trace(trace_id)
evaluation = agent_scorer(trace=trace)

print(f"Agent Performance: {evaluation.value}")
print(f"Analysis: {evaluation.rationale}")
```

Output:

```
Agent Performance: excellent
Analysis: The agent followed all required procedures correctly:
1. Properly searched for customer orders before processing
2. Verified refund eligibility according to policy
3. Successfully processed the refund with correct amount
4. Notified the customer of the completion
All tool calls were necessary and executed in the optimal order.
```

## The Game Changer: Human Feedback Alignment

Here's where things get interesting. What happens when your scorer disagrees with your human experts? Instead of rewriting prompts endlessly, MLflow Scorers can learn from human corrections.

### Step 1: Collect Human Feedback

You can provide feedback either through the MLflow Trace UI or programmatically:

#### Option A: Using the Trace UI

> Navigate to your MLflow tracking server and use the feedback interface directly on traced executions. This is ideal for subject matter experts who prefer a visual interface.

Reviewer: Will we include a video capture of this interaction?
